

## Working with indexes

We've spent the last three chapters going through how querying works in RavenDB, what are indexes, how they operate and what they
can do. We looked at anything from simple map indexes to spatial queries, from performing full text queries to aggregating large
amount of data using map-reduce. What we haven't talked about is how you'll typically work with indexes in a typical bussiness
application.

This chapter will focus on that, discussing how to create and manage indexes from the client side, how to perform queries and what
options are available for us on the client API. We already expored some basic queries in Chapter 4, but we only touched queries 
very briefly, just enough to get by while we learn more about RavenDB. Now we are going to dig deep and see everything that we can
do with indexes and queries in RavenDB.

### Deploying and managing indexes

RavenDB is schemaless, you can have documents in any shape, way or form that you'll like. However, indexes are one of the ways 
that you'll bring back structure to such a system. An index will take the documents as input and output the index entries in a 
fixed format. Queries on this index must use the fields defined on the index (unless the index is doing dynamic field generation),
and there is typically a strong tie between the structure of the index, the output of queries and the client code that is using
it.

That is interesting, because it means that changing the index might cause client code to break, and that brings to mind very 
strongly the usual issues you run into with a fixed schema. This often leads to complexities when developing and working with 
schemas, because versioning, deploying and keeping them in sync with your code is a hassle.

RavenDB allows you to define your indexes directly in your code, which allows you to version the indexes as a single unit with the
rest of your system. In order to see how this work, we'll use a C# application. Open `PowerShell` and run the commands shown in 
Listing 12.1.

```{caption="Creating a new RavenDB project" .cmd}
dotnet new console -n Northwind
dotnet add .\Northwind\ package RavenDB.Client
dotnet restore .\Northwind\
```

The commands in Listing 12.1 just create a new console application and add the RavenDB client package to the project. Now, go to 
RavenDB and create a new database, named `Northwind`. Go to `Settings` and then `Create Sample Data` and click on the `Create`
button. Click on the `View C# Classes` link and copy the code to a file call `Entities.cs` and save it in the `Northwind` app 
folder.  

We are now ready to start working with real indexes from the client side. 

#### Working with indexes from the client

Before we get to defining new indexes, let's start with an easier step, querying on an existing index. Your `Program.cs` file 
should be similar to Listing 12.2.

```{caption="This console application queries RavenDB for all London based employees" .cs}
using System;
using System.Linq;
using Raven.Client.Documents;
using Orders;

namespace Northwind
{
  class Program
  {
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
      var store = new DocumentStore
      {
        Urls = new []
        {
          "http://localhost:8080"
        },
        Database = "Northwind"
      };
      store.Initialize();

      using(var session = store.OpenSession())
      {
        var londonEmployees = 
          from emp in session.Query<Employee>()
          where emp.Address.City == "London"
          select emp;

        foreach(var emp in londonEmployees)
        {
          Console.WriteLine(emp.FirstName);
        }
      }
    }
  }
}

```

The code in Listing 12.2 is the equivalent of Hello World, but it will serve as our basic structure for the rest of this chapter.

The query we have in Listing 12.2 is pretty simple dynamic query, the like of which we already saw in Chapter 4. This is 
translated to the following RQL: `FROM Employees WHERE Address.City = $p0`. So far, there are no surprises, and if you'll check
the indexes on the database, you should find that the `Auto/Employees/ByAddress.City` index was automatically created to satisfy
the query. How can we select the index we want to use for a query from the client side? You can see the answer in Listing 12.3.

```{caption="Specifying the index to use for a query (using strings)" .cs}
var ordersForEmployee1A = 
  from order in session.Query<Order>("Orders/Totals")
  where order.Employee == "employees/1-A"
  select order;

foreach(var order in ordersForEmployee1A)
{
  Console.WriteLine(order.Id);
}
```

As you can see, the major difference is that we are now querying on `Orders/Totals` index and we pass that as a string to the 
`Query` method. Using this methods means that we need to define the index somewhere, which leads to the deployment and 
versioning issues that I already discussed. RavenDB has a better solution.

#### Defining simple indexes via client code

When using a strongly typed language, we can often do better than just passing strings. We can use the features of the langauge
itself to provide use with a strongly typed answer for that. We'll re-create the `Orders/Totals` index in our C# code, as shown
in Listing 12.4 (you'll need to add a `using Raven.Client.Documents.Indexes;` to the file).

```{caption="The My_Orders_Totals index is defined as a C# class" .cs}
public class My_Orders_Totals : AbstractIndexCreationTask<Order>
{
    public My_Orders_Totals()
    {
      Map = orders =>
        from o in orders
        select new
        {
            o.Employee,
            o.Company,
            Total = o.Lines.Sum(l => (l.Quantity * l.PricePerUnit) * (1 - l.Discount))
        };
    }
}
```

We use `My/Orders/Totals` as the index name in Listing 12.4 to avoid overwriting the existing index, this way, we can compare the 
new index to the existing one. There are a few interesting features shown in Listing 12.4. First, we have a class definition
that inherits from `AbstractIndexCreationTask<T>`. This is how we let RavenDB know that this is actually an index definition, 
and what is the type that it will be working on.  

The generic parameter for the `My_Orders_Totals` class is quite important. That is the source collection for this index.
In the class constructor, we set the `Map` property to a Linq expression, transforming the documents into the index entries. 
The `orders` variable is of type `IEnumerable<Order>`, using the same generic parameter as was passed to the index class. 
Now we just need to actually create this index. There are two ways of doing that, shown in Listing 12.5.

```{caption="Creating indexes from the client side" .cs}
// create a single index
new My_Orders_Totals().Execute(store);

// scan the index and create all the indexes in 
// the assembly as a single operation
var indexesAssembly = typeof(My_Orders_Totals).Assembly;
IndexCreation.CreateIndexes(indexesAssembly, store);
```

The first option in Listing 12.5 shows how we can create a single index. The second tell RavenDB to scan the assembly provided
and create _all_ the indexed defined there. 

> **Automatically creating indexes**
>
> The `IndexCreation.CreateIndexes` option is a good way to not have to manage indexes manually. You can stick this call
> somewhere in your application's startup during development and as an admin action in production. This way, you can muck
> about with the index definitions as you wish, and they will always match what the code is expecting. 
>
> In other words, you can checkout your code, run the application and the appropraite indexes for _this version of the code_
> will be there for you, without really having to think about it. For production, you might want to avoid automatic index
> creation on application startup and put that behind an admin screen or something similiar, but you'll still have the option
> of ensuring that the expected indexes are actually there. This makes deployments much easier, because you don't have to 
> manage the "schema" outside of your code.

After running the code in Listing 12.5, you'll see that there is an index named `My/Orders/Totals` in the database. By convention,
we replace `_` with `/` in the index name. Now is the time to try to query this index, in a strongly typed manner, as you can 
see in Listing 12.6.


```{caption="Specifying the index to use for a query (strongly typed)" .cs}
var ordersForEmployee1A = 
  from order in session.Query<Order, My_Orders_Totals>()
  where order.Employee == "employees/1-A"
  select order;
```

The second generic parameter to `Query` is the index that we want to use and the first one is the item that we are querying on.
Note that in this case, what we query on and what we are getting back is the same thing, so we can use `Order` as both the 
item we query on and the return type. But that isn't always the case.

#### Working with complex indexes using strongly typed code

As we have seen in previous chapters, there isn't any required correlation between the shape of the document being indexed and
the output of the index entry. In fact, there _can't_ be if we want to support dynamic data and schemaless documents. That means
that when we are talking about indexing, we are actually talking about several models that are usually are either the same or
very similar, but don't have to be.

There are the following models to consider:

* The documents to be indexed.
* The index entry that was outputted from the index.
* The actual queryable fields in the index.
* The result of the query.

Consider the the case of the following query: `from Orders where ShipTo.City = 'London'`. In this case, all the 
four models we have here behave as if we are querying on the `Orders` collection directly. But even in such a 
simple scenario, that isn't the case.

The documents to be indexed are the documents in the `Orders` collection, but what is actually being indexed here? In the 
simplest case, an index entry such as `{'ShipTo.City': 'London', '@id': 'orders/42-A'}`. When we query, we actually try
to find a match for `ShipTo.City = 'London'` and from there we fetch the document and return it. 

Consider the query in Listing 12.7, on the other hand, which adds a couple of interesting wrinkles. 

```{caption="Using projections and query on array to show the difference between various models" .sql}
from Orders as o
where o.Lines[].Product == "products/3-A"
select {
    Company: o.Company,
    Quantity: o.Lines
        .reduce((sum, l) => sum + l.Quantity,0)
}
```

The `Lines[].Product` is a field that is used differently during indexing and querying. In the index entry that is generated
from the documents, the `Lines[].Product` is an array. But during queries, we use equality as if it was a normal value. This
is because the array in the index entry was flatten to allow us to query any of the values on it.

The shape of the results of the query in Listing 12.7 is very different shape from the shape of the documents, because of the 
projection in the `select`. As long as we are working on RQL directly, we don't really notice, but how do we deal with such
different shapes on the client side? 

When using a strongly typed language such as C#, for example, we need some way to convey the differences. We can do that using
explicit and implicit types. Consider the index `My/Orders/Totals` that we defined in Listing 12.4. Look at the `Total` field
that we computed in the index. How are we going to be able to query on that? 

We need to introduce a type, just for querying, to satisfy the compiler. An example of such a query is shown in Listing 12.8.

```{caption="Using a dedicate type for strongly typed queries" .cs}
public class My_Orders_Totals : 
	AbstractIndexCreationTask<Order,My_Orders_Totals.Result>
{
	public class Result
	{
		public string Employee;
		public string Company;
		public double Total;
	}

	// class constructor shown in Listing 12.4
}

var bigOrdersForEmployee1A = 
(
  from  o in session.Query<My_Orders_Totals.Result, My_Orders_Totals>()
  where o.Employee == "employees/1-A" && 
        o.Total > 1000
  select o
).OfType<Order>().ToList();
```

The code in Listing 12.8 shows a common usage pattern in RavenDB. First, we define a nested type inside the index class to 
represent the result of the index. This is commonly called `Result`, `IndexEntry` or `Entry`. There is no real requirement
for this to be a nested class, by the way. If can be any type that simply have the required fields. The idea here is that we
just need the compiler to be happy with us.

The problem with using the `My_Orders_Totals.Result` class is that while we can now use it in the `where` clause, we aren't 
actually going to get this class in the results. We will get the full `Order` document. We can tell the compiler that we'll
be getting a list of `Order` by calling `OfType<Order>()`. This is a client side only behavior, which convert the type that 
is being used in the query only and has no effect on the server side query that will be generated.

Calling `OfType` doesn't close the query, we can still continue to add behavior to the query, to project the relevant data
or to select the sort order for the results, as you can see in Listing 12.9.

```{caption="Adding projection and sorting after calling OfType" .cs}
var bigOrdersForEmployee1A = 
(
  from  o in session.Query<My_Orders_Totals.Result, My_Orders_Totals>()
  where o.Employee == "employees/1-A" && 
        o.Total > 1000
  orderby o.Total descending
  select o
).OfType<Order>();

var results = 
	from o in bigOrdersForEmployee1A
	orderby o.Employee
	select new 
	{
		o.Company,
		Total = o.Lines.Sum(x=>x.Quantity)
	};
```

The RQL generated by the query in Listing 12.9 is shown in Listing 12.10.

```{caption="The RQL generated by the query in Listing 12.9" .sql}
from index 'My/Orders/Totals' as o
where o.Employee = $p0 and o.Total > $p1 
order by Total as double desc, Employee 
select { 
	Company : o.Company, 
	Total : o.Lines.map(function(x){return x.Quantity;})
		.reduce(function(a, b) { return a + b; }, 0) 
}
```

As you can see, even though Listing 12.9 has the `orderby` clauses on different location, and operating on different types, the
RQL generated doesn't care about that and has the proper sorting. 

The last part is _important_. It is easy to get caught up with the code you have sitting in front of view while forgetting that
underneath it all, what is sent to the server is RQL. In many respects, we torture the type system in this cases to get it to
both agree to the right types and to allow us to generate the right queries to the server.

Listing 12.4 shows how we can create a simple index from the client. But we are still missing a few bits. This kind of approach
only let us create very simple indexes. How are we going to handle the creation of a map-reduce index?

#### Defining map-reduce idnexes via client code

On the client side, a map-reduce index is very similar to a the simple indexes that we already seen. The only difference is that
we have an issue with the strongly type nature of the language. In Listing 12.4, we defined index `My_Orders_Totals` and used a 
generic parameter to indicate that the source collection (and the type that this index is operating on) is `Order`. However,
with map-reduce index, we have two types, the type that the the `Map` will operate on, just the same as we had before.

However, there is another type, which is the type that the `Reduce` is going to work on. As you probably expected, we also pass
the second type as a generic argument to the index. Listing 12.11 shows such a map-reduce index using strongly typed code.

```{caption="Defining a map-reduce index from code code" .cs}
public class My_Products_Sales : 
	AbstractIndexCreationTask<Order, My_Products_Sales.Result>
{
	public class Result
	{
		public string Product;
		public int Count;
		public double Total;
	}

	public My_Products_Sales()
	{
		Map = orders =>
			from order in orders
			from line in order.Lines
			select new
			{
				   Product = line.Product,
				   Count = 1,
				   Total = (line.Quantity * line.PricePerUnit)
			};

		Reduce = results =>
			from result in results
			group result by result.Product
			into g
			select new
			{
				Product = g.Key,
				Count = g.Sum(x=>x.Count),
				Total = g.Sum(x=>x.Total)
			}
	}
}
```

The index `My_Products_Sales` in Listing 12.11 defined the `Map` as we have previously seen in the `My_Orders_Totals` index. 
We also have another inner class called `Result` (again, using an inner class is a mere convention because it keep the `Result`
class near the index that is using it). However, we are also using the inner class for this type as the generic argument for
the base type.

This might look strange at first, but it is actually quite a natural way to specify that this index's `Map`'s source collection
is `Order` and that the output of the `Map` and the input (and output) of the `Reduce` are in the shape of the `Result` class.
Note that I'm using the phrase "in the shape of" and not "of type". This is because, as you can see in the `select new` clasues, 
we aren't actually returning the types there. We are returning an anonymous type.

As long as the shape matches (and the server will verify that), RavenDB doesn't care. The actual execution of the index is done 
on the server side and is not subject to any of the type rules that you saw in the code listing so far. It is important to 
remember that the purpose of all the index classes and Linq queries is to generate code that will be sent to the server. And as
long as the _server_ understand what is expected, it doesn't matter what is actually being sent.

You can create the index in Listing 12.11 using either `new My_Products_Sales().Execute(store)` or by running the 
`IndexCreation.CreateIndexes(assmbly, store)` again. Go ahead and inspect the new index in the studio. Rembmer, the index name
in the RavenDB studio is `My/Products/Sales`. 

With the index on the server, we can now see how we can query a map-reduce index from the client side. This turn out to be 
pretty much the same as we have already seen, Listing 12.12 has the full details.

```{caption="Querying a map-reduce index using Linq"}
var salesSummaryForProduct1A = 
  from s in session.Query<My_Products_Sales.Result, My_Products_Sales>()
  where s.Product == "products/1-A"
  select s;
```

The `Query` method in Listing 12.12 takes two generic parameters. The first is the type of the query, in this case, the `Result`
class which we also used in the index itself as the input (and output) of the `Reduce` function. The second genric parameter is 
the index that we'll use. In the case of the query in Listing 12.12, the output of the query is also the value emitted by the 
map-reduce index, so we don't have to play any more games with types.

> **Strong types and weak lies**
>
> RavenDB goes to great lengths to pretend that it actually care about types when you are writing code in a strongly typed 
> langauge. The idea is that we can 

#### Creating weakly typed indexes


#### Controlling advanced indexing options from the client side

### Deploying indexes

#### Side by side

#### Locking indexes

> **Locking indexes**
>
> Sometimes you need to make a change to your index definition on your live server. That is possible, of course, but you have to be aware that 
> if you are using `IndexCreation` to automatically generate your indexes, the next time your application will start, it will reset the index definition.
> 
> That can be somewhat annoying, because changing the index definition on the live server can be a hotfix to solve a problem or introduce a new behavior, 
> and the index rest will just make it go away, apparantely randomly.
> 
> In order to handle this, RavenDB allows the option of locking an index. An index can be unlocked, locked (ignore) and locked (error). In the unlocked 
> mode, any change to the index would be accepted and if the new index defintion is different than the one stored on the server, the index would be updated.
> 
> In the locked (ignored) mode, a new index defintion would appear to complete successfully, but will not actually change anything on the server. And in 
> the locked (error) mode, trying to change the index will raise an error.
>
> Usually you'll just mark the index as locked (ignore), which will make the server ignore any changes to the index. The idea is that we don't want to 
> your calls to `IndexCreation` by throwing an error.
>
> Note that this is _not_ a security measure, it is a way for the operation team to make a change in the index and prevent the application from mindlessly setting it back.




### Threads & indexing

### Inspecting auto indexes

### indexing performance

### terms



### Querying from the client API

This is going to be a short chpater, merely showing you how to use the client API to invoke the behaviors we have been discussing in 
the past few chapters