
## Encrypting your data

There are three states of data. Data in transit, when it flows through the network. Data in use, when it is actively being
read and modified and data at rest, which refers to data that is stored in stable storage. In the previous chapter, we discussed
securing your data in transit using TLS 1.2 and strong encryption. In this chapter, we are going to focus on securing your data
at rest. 

Some data is intrinsically public in nature, a press release, for example. Some data is _very_ private, such as healthcare, 
financial, personally identifying, etc. A part of any security consideration is the notion of a defence in depth. Even if your
servers are protected (physically and virtually), you still need to consider the case that someone will be able to get their
hands on your data.

RavenDB supports strong encryption (`XChaCha20Poly1305` with 256 bits key) to do full and transparent data encryption of your
entire database. This feature ensures that nothing unencrypted is written to the disk and even in memory, outside of a running
transaction, everything is encrypted. 

In many industries, data encryption is a regulatory requirement (PCI and HIPPA comes to mind) and it is a fairly routine 
request even if the application in question doesn't _require_ it, but can benefit from the additional safeties it provies. 
The encryption of data at rest doesn't come to replace other security measures (such as limit access to your database, encrypting
the communication lines, protecting your access credentials, etc) but to complement them. 

The major advantage of having encryption at the database level is that you don't need to change anything in your applications 
and clients. RavenDB will take care of all encryption behind the scenes, with no external changes that you have to deal with. 
A user that has access to an encrypted database can simple access it, query documents, modify them, etc. RavenDB will take 
care of encrypting and decrypting data as needed. RavenDB also require all encrytped database access to use HTTPS, so this takes
care of the data in transit portion as well. 

> **What database encryption does _not_ protect you from?**
> 
> Encrypting the database means that if you open your database file, the data inside it will appear indistinguishable from random
> noise, unless you have the key. This means that if you lost a hard disk, you can be sure that the data on it will not be accessible.
> But that is just one threat vector.
>
> Encrypting the database will not protect you from lost credentials. If that user has permissions for the
> database in question, RavenDB will decrypt the information from the disk and hand it over to this authorized user.
> 
> Such encryption will also only place a few hurdles in the path of someone that is able to execute code on the database machine
> as the database user or as `root`, because they will be able to connect to RavenDB using the `rvn admin-channel` and rergister
> a certificate, then just access the data normally. 

RavenDB goes to great lengths to ensure that on disk, and even in memory, your data is encrypted. The data is only decrypted when
there is an active transaction, and even then, only the pieces that are touched by that transaction are decrypted. Once the 
transaction is completed, RavenDB will zero the memory to erase the sensitive data. 

Database encryption should be deployed as part of comprehensive security strategy, including control access to the machines, 
having a secure backup strategy, including security concerns with your high availability and offsite deployment, key management
and the appropriate audit / monitoring tools. This is a much wider topic than can be covered in this book, so I'll focus only
on the details of data encryption in RavenDB.

Before we get to the details, I want to mention that encryption has a cost. In terms of the database performance, it is usually
around 5% - 10%, depending on the exact load. In most cases, that is a perfectly fine price to pay for the additional security.
However, there are also additional cost in managing encrypted databases. Key management and backup, secure backups, being able 
to _get_ the encryption key when you need to restore the database, etc. 

All of these can add up to significant operational overhead, as much as RavenDB attempts to reduce it. I suggest ensuring  that
you need the benefits of database encryption before enabling this feature, rather than just saying "encryption is good" and 
pressing forward needlessly. 

We'll start by doing a walkthough of actually defining an encrypted database through the studio, to get you started, and then
we'll dive into what is actually going on behind the scenes and how RavenDB is actively protecting your data.

### Setting up an encrypted database

The first requirement for an encrypted database is that your cluster will run in a secured mode. 


### Full database encryption

What is encrypted? Database files, scratch buffers, journals.


Watch the logs file. 

### Key management

* Key backup
* Different keys for different servers


### Additional consdierations

* Memory locks
* Encryption of backups !!!