
# Introduction

RavenDB is a second-generation document database, part of the NoSQL approach. That may or may not mean anything to you. In case it doesn't, here is the "elevator pitch": A document database is a database that stores "documents",  meaning structured information in the form of self-contained data (as opposed to a Word or Excel document). Usually, a document is in JSON or XML format. RavenDB is, essentially, a database for storing and working with JSON data.

RavenDB is a second-generation database because we've had time to observe what our predecessors have been doing, and thus time to learn from their mistakes. As a result, RavenDB has a number of guidelines which lead to a very different experience than is usually associated with NoSQL databases. For example, RavenDB is an ACID database, unlike many other NoSQL databases. And because we were aware of some pain points of NoSQL databases, it was designed explicitly to be easy to use and maintain.

I'm a developer at heart. That means that one of my favorite activities is writing code. Writing documentation, on the other hand, is so far down the list of my favorite activities that one could say it isn't even on the list. I do like writing blog posts, and I've been maintaining an [active blog](http://ayende.com/blog) for over a decade now.

Documentation tends to be dry and, while informative, it hardly makes for good reading (or for an interesting time writing it). RavenDB has quite a bit of documentation that tells you how to use it, what to do and why. This book isn't about providing documentation; we've got plenty of that. A blog post tells a story -- even if most of mine are technical stories. I like writing those, and I've been pleasantly surprised that a large number of people also seem to like reading them.

## What is this?

This book is effectively a book-length blog post. The main idea here is that I want to give you a way to _grok_^[Grok means to understand so thoroughly that the observer becomes a part of the observed—to merge, blend, intermarry, lose identity in group experience.  Robert A. Heinlein, Stranger in a Strange Land] RavenDB. Not just what it does, but how it does it and all the reasoning behind the bytes. In effect, I want you to understand all the _whys_ of RavenDB.

Since a blog post and a book have very different structure, audience and purpose, I'll instead aim to give you the same easy-reading feeling of your favorite blogger. I'm not going to try for dry documentation, nor is this meant to be a reference book. If you need either, you can read the [online RavenDB documentation](http://ravendb.net/docs).

The content of this book has evolved. It started out with the bare bones outline of the RavenDB course we have been teaching for the past five years. It grew with the formalization of internal training we do for new team members. This is a guided tour of RavenDB, largely with the aim of explaining how to use it, but including common forays into understanding how and why RavenDB does certain things.

By the end of this book, you're going to have a far better understanding of how RavenDB is put together. More importantly, you'll have the knowledge and skills to make much more efficient use of RavenDB.

## Who is this for?

I've tried to make this book useful for a broad category of users. Developers reading this book will understand how to best use RavenDB features to create awesome applications. Architects will have the knowledge required to design and guide large scale systems with RavenDB clusters at their core. The operations team will know how to monitor, support and nurture your RavenDB instances in production.

Regardless of who you are you'll come away from this book with a greater understanding of all the moving pieces and the ability to make RavenDB do as you wish.

This book assumes that you have working knowledge of .NET / C#, though RavenDB can be used for .NET, Java, node.js, Python, Ruby and PHP. Pretty much everything discussed in the book is applicable, even if you aren't writing code in C#. If you are running on the JVM in particular (Java, Scala, Clojure and Groovy), the client API is identical to the .NET one, so even the client side knowledge is transferable.

## In this book...

One of my major problems in writing this book was how to structure it. There are many things that relate to one another to a degree that it is complex to try to understand them in isolation. We can't talk about modeling documents before we understand the kind of features that we have available for us to work with, for example. Because of that, I'm going to introduce things in stages.

### Part I

[Chapter 2](#a-little-history) introduces RavenDB, non-relational document stores, and the background story for RavenDB. Not only the technical details about what it does, but what led to its existence, and what was so important that we had to create a whole new database for it. If you are familiar with NoSQL databases and their history, you can skip this chapter and come back to it later.

[Chapter 3](#zero-to-60-with-ravendb-from-installation-to-usage) focuses on setting up a RavenDB server from scratch, then starting to work with the database. From there, we discuss how to use the RavenDB Client API and what sort of infrastructure your application can use when taking advantage of RavenDB. What RavenDB actually does with your data and storage engine choices are also covered. Finally, we talk briefly about running in production (which is covered in greater depth in [Part IV](#part-iv)).

[Chapter 4](#ravendb-concepts) discusses RavenDB concepts, ranging from introductions of entities and documents to concepts of collections and metadata. We go over document identifiers in detail, including all the common strategies to generate a document ID and the implication of each. From there, we discuss etags and their use in RavenDB, including caching and optimistic concurrency control.

[Chapter 5](#advanced-client-api-usage) explores advanced client-side operations. We begin by demonstrating how we can automate common tasks via listeners and then fine-tune the serialization process. Next is a review of result streaming and bulk inserts, as the preferred ways to port a lot of data out of and into RavenDB efficiently. From there, we talk about partial document updates (patching), lazy request optimizations, change notifications and the use of result transformers.

### Part II

Indexing

### Part III

Modeling

### Part IV

Operations

### Part V

Scale out

## Distributed computing

### Fallacies
