
# RavenDB concepts

We have a running instance of RavenDB, and we have already seen how we can put and get information out of our database. But we are still only just scratching the surface of what we need to know to make effective use of RavenDB. In this chapter, we'll go over the major concepts inside RavenDB. 

The first step along the way is to understand what documents _are_.

## Entities, Aggregate Roots and Documents

When using a relational database, you are used to using Entities (hydrated instances of rows from various tables) that makes up a single Aggregate Root. There is also the relatively minor concept of Value Objects, but those tend to be underused, because you _have_ to have a distinct identity for many things in your domain that don't really require it. The classic example is the order line. It has no independent existance, and it must be modified in concert with the whole order.
Yet, in a relational database, an order line must have its own primary key, and it is entirely feasible to change an order independently of the order it is associated with.

We'll dedicate Chapter 4, Document based modeling, for a full discussion on modeling behavior inside RavenDB, but here are the basics. In RavenDB, every document is an Aggregate Root. In fact, we generally don't even bother calling them Aggregate Roots, and just call them Entities. The distinction between an Aggregate and an Entity is only there because of the limitations of relational databases.

An Entity is-a document, and it isn't limited to simple structures such as a key/value map. You can model very complex structures inside a document. In the order and order line case, we'll not model the order and order lines independently. Instead, the order lines will be _embedded_ inside the order. Thus, whenever we want to load the order, we'll get all of the order lines with it. And modification to an order line (be it updating, removing or adding) is a modification to the order as a whole, as it should be.

The order line is now a Value Type, an object that only has meaning within its parent object, not independently. This has a lot of interesting implications. You don't have to worry about Coarse Grain Locking^[You might notice a lot of terms from the Domain Driven Design book used here, that is quite intentional. When we created RavenDB, we intentionally made sure that DDD applications would be a natural usecase for RavenDB.] or partial entity updates. Rules like external references should only be to aggregates are automatically enforced, simply because documents _are_ aggregates, and they are the only thing you can reference.

## Collections

## Metadata


## Document Ids

### High low

### Semantic ids

### Identity

## Etags

## Optimistic Concurrency



## Transformers

## Distributed Transactions

