
# Static indexes

In the previous chapter, we talked about dynamic indexes and the query optimizer. For the most part, those serve very well to free you from the need to manually deal with indexing. Pretty much all of the standard queries can be safely handed over to the query optimizer and it will take care of that.

That leave us to deal with all of the non standard queries. Those can be full text search, spatial queries, querying on dynamic fields or any real complexity. That isn't to say that defining static indexes in RavenDB is complex, only that they are required when the query optimizer can't really guess what you wanted.

By the end of this chapter, you'll know how to create static index in the stuido and in your code, how to version them in your source control system and how to make RavenDB sit down, beg and (most importantly) go and fetch the right documents for you.

## Creating & managing indexes

We'll start with the simplest possible index, just finding companies by their country. Go to the Northwind database in the Studio, and then to the indexes tab, create a new index, name it "Companies/ByCountry" and then fill the map field with the following index definition:

 	from company in docs.Companies
	select new { Country = company.Address.Country }

You can now save the index. RavenDB will now run all the documents in the `Companies` collection and push them through the index defintion. For the `companies/1` document, the output of this index would be a single field `Country`, which has the value 'Germany'. We have gone on exactly how this work in the previous chapters. 

This kind of index isn't really useful, of course. We are usually better off letting the query optimizer handle such simple indexes, rather than write such trivial indexes ourselves.
We demonstrate with such an index because it allows us to talk about the mechanics of working with indexes without going into any extra details.

With RavenDB, you don't have to define a schema, but in many cases, your code will expect certain indexes to be available. How do you manage your indexes? 

One way of doing that is to do so manually. You can either export just the index defintions from the development server and import them to the production server. Another would be to use the copy/paste index defintion from one server to the next. Or you can just jot it down on using pen & paper and remember to push those changes to production.

Of course, all those options have various issues, not the least of which is that they are manual processes, and that they don't tie down to your code and the version that it is expecting. This is a common problem in any schema management system. You have to take special steps to make sure that everything is in sycn, and you need to version and control your changes explicitly.

That is the cause for quite a lot of pain. When giving talks, I used to ask people how many of them ever managed to get a failed deployment because they forgot to run the schema changes. And I got a _lot_ of hands raising, every single time. With RavenDB, we didn't want to have the same issues. That is why we have the option of managing indexes in your code.

## Defining indexes in your code

So far, we worked with indexes only inside the studio. That is a great way to work with them, but it doesn't allow us to _manage_ them properly. Most importantly, it is possible for indexes to go out of tune with our codebase. That is why RavenDB allows to define indexes in code. Listing 8.1 shows the same index as before, but now defined as C# code inside our solution.


```{caption="{Defining index in code}" .cs}
public class Companies_ByCountry : AbstractIndexCreationTask<Company>
{
	public Companies_ByCountry()
	{
		Map = companies =>
			from company in companies
			select new { company.Address.Country };
	}
}
```

There are a few things to note about Listing 8.1. 

* The class name is `Companies_ByCountry`, by convention, we'll turn that into an index named `Companies/ByCountry` (since we can't use slash as a C# class name).
* The class inherits from AbstractIndexCreationTask<Company>, which marks this class as an index that operates on the `Companies` collection.
* The value of the `Map` property is the actual index defintion that will be sent to the server.

Note that this is _just_ the index defintion. Having this in your code doesn't do anything. In order to actually create the index, you need to execute it, like so:

	new Companies_ByCountry().Execute(documentStore);

This will create the index on the server. But you don't want to have to remember this for each and every index that you have. A far more common way to handle this is to ask RavenDB to just handle it all for you:

	var asm = typeof (Companies_ByCountry).Assembly;
	IndexCreation.CreateIndexes(asm, documentStore);

Usually, this is done as part of initializing the document store, so all the indexes in the assemblies will be picked up and created automatically. This frees you from having to deal with manually managing the indexes. If you create or modify an index, it will create the index on the server automatically. During development, this is the prefered mode for working. Yoy modify the index, hit F5, and the index is updated on the server side. If the server side index definition matches the index definition on the client, the operation has no effect. 

The indexes are defined in your code, so they are versioned and deployed with your code. That relieves you from handling index updates manually. This dramatically reduce the amount of effort and pain that you have to go through for deployments.

> **Locking indexes**
>
> Sometimes you need to make a change to your index definition on your live server. That is possible, of course, but you have to be aware that 
> if you are using `IndexCreation` to automatically generate your indexes, the next time your application will start, it will reset the index definition.
> 
> That can be somewhat annoying, because changing the index definition on the live server can be a hotfix to solve a problem or introduce a new behavior, 
> and the index rest will just make it go away, apparantely randomly.
> 
> In order to handle this, RavenDB allows the option of locking an index. An index can be unlocked, locked (ignore) and locked (error). In the unlocked 
> mode, any change to the index would be accepted and if the new index defintion is different than the one stored on the server, the index would be updated.
> 
> In the locked (ignored) mode, a new index defintion would appear to complete successfully, but will not actually change anything on the server. And in 
> the locked (error) mode, trying to change the index will raise an error.
>
> Usually you'll just mark the index as locked (ignore), which will make the server ignore any changes to the index. The idea is that we don't want to 
> your calls to `IndexCreation` by throwing an error.
>
> Note that this is _not_ a security measure, it is a way for the operation team to make a change in the index and prevent the application from mindlessly setting it back.

Now that we know how to work with simple indexes in our code, we'll 

## Computation during indexing

DateTime.Now not allowed

## Spatial

## Dynamic fields

## Recurse

## Multi map

## Queries

## Set based operations

## Load Document 

## Storing fields

