
# Getting the most out of RavenDB 

TODO: Think of a better title of this chapter... suggestions welcome

So far, we have gone over how RavenDB is built, how all the different pieces are put together, and the reasoning behind it. The idea is to give you a good grounding in how the database is put together, so you can make informed decisions about how to use it.

There is one problem with this approach, while it gives you a good look of how things are looking from the database implementor point of view. It doesn't show you how things look from the point of view of the database _user_. I'm assuming that we are going to have more users than implementors, so this chapter if for anyone using RavenDB.

More specifically, I'm going to cover a lot of minor features in this chapter. None of them are earth shattering features, but each of them was designed to address a specific need easily and reduce the overall friction when working with RavenDB.

## Waiting for indexes

We have already discussed the BASE^[Basically Available, Soft state, Eventually consistent] nature of RavenDB indexes. Because indexes are updated by background tasks, it means that neither writes nor reads are forced to wait for them to update. This is generally a good thing, and it fits nicely with the RavenDB mentality of building features to survive tough production environments.

Of course, sometimes this does cause issues, because you might want to explicitly wait until the indexes have caught up with what you did. Usually you see this in work flows that involves a user modifying or creating an item, then immediately being shown the results of a query that should contain the modified information. Because the two requests are happening pretty much as the same time, it is possible that the query will get to the index before the index had the chance to process the modified document, resulting in a stale query.

Usually stale queries aren't an issue, but in this case, the user will notice that we are missing the changes they just made, and might try to repeat their action, resulting in duplicate data. Because of that, RavenDB gives you the ability to explicitly wait for the index to finish updating. 

This can be done with the `WaitForNonStaleResultsAsOf()` family of functions. 

> **The wrong way to wait**
> 
> In addition to `WaitForNonStaleResultsAsOf()`, there is also the `WaitForNonStaleResults()` method. Usage of 
> this method anywhere but inside unit tests is _strongly discouraged_. 
>
> Unlike the `WaitForNonStaleResultsAsOf()` methods, the `WaitForNonStaleResults()` method will wait until _all_
> changes have been indexed. Including changes that happened after the relevant query was issued. If new data comes
> in at a rate of one document every 20 ms, and indexing takes 25 ms. `WaitForNonStaleResults()` will cause a time 
> out, because the index is never actually non stale. Even though it index all documents quickly, it always have 
> work to do.
>
> Note that even though that in this example indexing takes longer than the time to the next write, RavenDB will
> deal with that by batching multiple documents into a single index batch, and usually will have only one or two
> documents to index per batch given this scenario.

### Personal Consistency

## Spatial

## Searching (.Search() and friends)

## Dynamic aggregation

## Query statistics

## Result transformers

- Using for queries
- Parameters

## Listeners 

## Document Identifiers
RegisterIdConvention

## Changes API

## Low level commands

## Deferring commands

## Subscriptions

## Self profiling

## Control the client cache
